samples: matter: Add Event Trigger support for all samples (#14511)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/protocols/matter/end_product/test_event_triggers.rst

   * - Reboot
     - None
     - Reboot the device.
     - `0xF000000000000000` - `0xF00000000000FFFF`
     - The range of `0x0000` - `0xFFFF` represents the delay in ms to wait until the reboot occurs.
       The maximum time delay is UINT32_MAX ms.
       The value is provided in HEX format.
   * - OTA query
     - :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_OTA_REQUESTOR` = ``y``
     - Trigger an OTA firmware update.
     - `0x0100000000000100` - `0x01000000000001FF`
     - The range of `0x00` - `0xFF` is the fabric index value.
       The maximum fabric index value depends on the current device's settings.
   * - Door lock jammed
     - :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_PRODUCT_ID` = ``32774``
     - Simulate the jammed lock state.
     - `0x3277400000000000`
     - This activation code does not contain any value.

.. _matter_test_event_triggers_setting_enable_key:

Setting the enable key
======================

The enable key can be provided utilizing the factory data or directly in the application code.

Using factory data
------------------

You can set the enable key to a specific value only if the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA` Kconfig option is set to ``y``.

> Otherwise, the default value ``00112233445566778899AABBCCDDEEFF`` will be used.

Author: I guess it should be, I will propose something.

To specify the enable key through the build system, enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD` Kconfig option by setting it to ``y``.
Then, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_ENABLE_KEY` Kconfig option to a 32-byte hexadecimal string value.

> If :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD` is set to ``n``, you can use the Python script to generate the factory data set with the specific enable key value.
> To learn how to do this, read the :doc:`matter:nrfconnect_factory_data_configuration` guide in the Matter documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA_BUILD` is set to ``n``, you can follow the :doc:`matter:nrfconnect_factory_data_configuration` guide in the Matter documentation to generate the factory data set with the specific enable key value.
```
Since we're not introducing the Python script on this page, I think this is a better wording.

You can utilize the predefined test event triggers defined in the :ref:`matter_test_event_triggers_default_test_event_triggers` section to streamline your testing process.
If the predefined options do not meet your requirements, you can also define your own event triggers.
To learn how to create custom event triggers, refer to the :ref:`matter_test_event_triggers_custom_triggers` section of the documentation.

Requirements
************

The :ref:`CHIP Tool application <ug_matter_gs_tools_chip>` is required to send ``test-event-trigger`` commands to the general diagnostics cluster.
Ensure that it is installed before initiating Matter testing events.

Your device needs to includes the general diagnostics cluster within its Matter data model database to perform Matter testing events.
For guidance on configuring the general diagnostics cluster on your device, refer to the instructions provided on the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_adding_cluster` page.

Activation of test event codes requires the provisioning of an enable key.
To ensure secure operation, the enable key must be specific for each device.

> You can find the detailed instructions on how to establish the enable key for your device in the :ref:`matter_test_event_triggers_setting_enable_key`` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find the detailed instructions on how to establish the enable key for your device in the :ref:`matter_test_event_triggers_setting_enable_key` section.
```
Very small error that breaks the doc build.

    uint8_t enableKeyData[chip::TestEventTriggerDelegate::kEnableKeyLength] = {
        0x00, 0x11, 0x22, 0x33, 0x44, 0x55,
        0x66, 0x77, 0x88, 0x99, 0xaa, 0xbb,
        0xcc, 0xdd, 0xee, 0xff
    };

    /* Call SetEnableKey method to load the prepared value to the TestEventTrigger class. */
    Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::Instance().SetEnableKey(ByteSpan {enableKeyData});

.. _matter_test_event_triggers_custom_triggers:

Custom test event triggers
==========================

You can define and register custom test event triggers to initiate specific actions on your device.

An activation code, which is 64 bits in length, and consist of two components: the event trigger ID and the event trigger value.

* The event trigger ID is 32 bits long and uniquely identifies the trigger.
  It is provided as the first 32 bits of the activation code.
* The event trigger value is specific to the given trigger and is supplied as the last 32 bits of the activation code.

The activation code follows the pattern ``0xIIIIIIIIVVVVVVVV``, where ``I`` represents the ID part and ``V`` represents the value part.

> For example the ``0x1000000000001234`` activation code stands for trigger ID qual to ``0x1000000000000000`` and it contains a specific value ``0x1234``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example the ``0x1000000000001234`` activation code stands for a trigger ID qual to ``0x1000000000000000`` and a specific value of ``0x1234``.
```

A new event trigger consists of three fields: ``Id``, ``Mask``, and ``Callback``.

* The ``Id`` field is 64 bits long and specifies a unique ID for the trigger.
* The ``Mask`` field is 32 bits long and specifies a mask for the trigger's value.
* The ``Callback`` field is a callback function that will be invoked when the device receives a corresponding activation code.

The maximum number of event triggers that can be registered is configurable.
To adjust this limit, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_TEST_EVENT_TRIGGERS_MAX` Kconfig option to the desired value.

To register a new test event trigger, follow these steps:

1. Create a function that will be executed when the device receives a valid enable key and activation code.

  This function must return a ``CHIP_ERROR`` code and accept a ``Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::TriggerValue`` as its argument.

>   You can utilize the provided argument within this function as needed.
>   Use ``CHIP_ERROR`` codes to communicate appropriate responses to the Matter Controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can utilize the provided argument within this function as needed.
  
  Use ``CHIP_ERROR`` codes to communicate appropriate responses to the Matter Controller.
```

  For instance, you might return ``CHIP_ERROR_INVALID_ARGUMENT`` to indicate that the user has provided an incorrect value argument.

    .. note::

      The callback method is not thread-safe.
      Ensure that all operations within it are executed in a thread-safe manner.

>       To perform operations within the Matter stack context, use the ``chip::DeviceLayer::SystemLayer().ScheduleLambda`` method. For operations in the application context, use the ``Nrf::PostTask`` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      To perform operations within the Matter stack context, use the ``chip::DeviceLayer::SystemLayer().ScheduleLambda`` method.
      For operations in the application context, use the ``Nrf::PostTask`` function.
```

  Here is an example of how to create a callback function:

  .. code-block:: c++

    CHIP_ERROR MyFunctionCallback(Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::TriggerValue value)
    {
        /* Define the required behavior of the device here. */

        return CHIP_NO_ERROR;
    }

> #. Register the new event trigger:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Register the new event trigger.
```

  Use the following example as a guide to register a new event:

    .. code-block:: c++

      /* Create a new event */
      Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::EventTrigger myEventTrigger;

      /* Assign all fields */
      myEventTrigger.Id = /* Fill the ID filed */;
      myEventTrigger.Mask = /* Fill the value mask filed */;
      myEventTrigger.Callback = MyFunctionCallback;

      /* Register the new event */
      CHIP_ERROR err = Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::Instance().RegisterTestEventTrigger(myEventTrigger);

      /* Remember to check the CHIP_ERROR return code */

  Here's an example to handle the ``0xF000F00000001234`` activation code, where 1234 is the event trigger value field:

    .. code-block:: c++

      Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::EventTrigger myEventTrigger;
      myEventTrigger.Id = 0xF000F0000000;
      myEventTrigger.Mask = 0xFFFF;
      myEventTrigger.Callback = MyFunctionCallback;

      CHIP_ERROR err = Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::Instance().RegisterTestEventTrigger(myEventTrigger);

Usage

> =====

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*****
```

> To trigger a specific event on the device, fill the `enable key`, `activation code`, and `node id` fields and run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To trigger a specific event on the device, run the following command: 
```

.. code-block:: console

   ./chip-tool generaldiagnostics test-event-trigger hex:<enable key> <activation code> <node id> 0

> An example of the Reboot activation code with 5 ms delay for Matter Template device which has a `node id` set to ``1``, using the default enable key:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace the ``enable key``, ``activation code``, and ``node id`` values with the values for the event you want to trigger.
The following is an example of the Reboot activation code with a 5 ms delay for Matter Template device which has a ``node id`` set to ``1``, using the default enable key:
```

Requirements
************

The :ref:`CHIP Tool application <ug_matter_gs_tools_chip>` is required to send ``test-event-trigger`` commands to the general diagnostics cluster.
Ensure that it is installed before initiating Matter testing events.

Your device needs to includes the general diagnostics cluster within its Matter data model database to perform Matter testing events.
For guidance on configuring the general diagnostics cluster on your device, refer to the instructions provided on the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_adding_cluster` page.

Activation of test event codes requires the provisioning of an enable key.
To ensure secure operation, the enable key must be specific for each device.
You can find the detailed instructions on how to establish the enable key for your device in the :ref:`matter_test_event_triggers_setting_enable_key` section.

.. _matter_test_event_triggers_default_test_event_triggers:

Default test event triggers
***************************

You can use the pre-defined common test event triggers in your application.
These pre-defined test triggers are enabled by default.

> To disable them, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_TEST_EVENT_TRIGGERS_REGISTER_DEFAULTS` Kconfig option to ``n``.

Author: I do it regarding our tests, but in fact we can disable it by default - it was my first thought.

* The event trigger ID is 32 bits long and uniquely identifies the trigger.
  It is supplied as the first 32 bits of the activation code.
* The event trigger value is specific to a given trigger.
  It is supplied as the last 32 bits of the activation code.

This means that the activation code has the pattern ``0xIIIIIIIIVVVVVVVV``, where ``I`` represents the ID part and ``V`` represents the value part.

For example the ``0x1000000000001234`` activation code stands for a trigger ID equal to ``0x1000000000000000`` and a specific value of ``0x1234``.

A new event trigger consists of three fields: ``Id``, ``Mask``, and ``Callback``.

* The ``Id`` field is 64 bits long and specifies a unique ID for the trigger.
* The ``Mask`` field is 32 bits long and specifies a mask for the trigger's value.
* The ``Callback`` field is a callback function that will be invoked when the device receives a corresponding activation code.

The maximum number of event triggers that can be registered is configurable.
To adjust this limit, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_TEST_EVENT_TRIGGERS_MAX` Kconfig option to the desired value.

To register a new test event trigger, follow these steps:

> 1. Create a function that will be executed when the device receives a valid enable key and activation code.
> 
>   This function must return a ``CHIP_ERROR`` code and accept a ``Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::TriggerValue`` as its argument.
>   You can utilize the provided argument within this function as needed.
> 
>   Use ``CHIP_ERROR`` codes to communicate appropriate responses to the Matter Controller.
>   For instance, you might return ``CHIP_ERROR_INVALID_ARGUMENT`` to indicate that the user has provided an incorrect value argument.
> 
>     .. note::
> 
>       The callback method is not thread-safe.
>       Ensure that all operations within it are executed in a thread-safe manner.
>       To perform operations within the Matter stack context, use the ``chip::DeviceLayer::SystemLayer().ScheduleLambda`` method.
>       For operations in the application context, use the ``Nrf::PostTask`` function.
> 
> 
>   Here is an example of how to create a callback function:
> 
>   .. code-block:: c++
> 
>     CHIP_ERROR MyFunctionCallback(Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::TriggerValue value)
>     {
>         /* Define the required behavior of the device here. */
> 
>         return CHIP_NO_ERROR;
>     }
> 
> #. Register the new event trigger.
> 
>   Use the following example as a guide to register a new event:
> 
>     .. code-block:: c++
> 
>       /* Create a new event */
>       Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::EventTrigger myEventTrigger;
> 
>       /* Assign all fields */
>       myEventTrigger.Id = /* Fill the ID filed */;
>       myEventTrigger.Mask = /* Fill the value mask filed */;
>       myEventTrigger.Callback = MyFunctionCallback;
> 
>       /* Register the new event */
>       CHIP_ERROR err = Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::Instance().RegisterTestEventTrigger(myEventTrigger);
> 
>       /* Remember to check the CHIP_ERROR return code */
> 
> 
>   Here's an example to handle the ``0xF000F00000001234`` activation code, where 1234 is the event trigger value field:
> 
>     .. code-block:: c++
> 
>       Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::EventTrigger myEventTrigger;
>       myEventTrigger.Id = 0xF000F0000000;
>       myEventTrigger.Mask = 0xFFFF;
>       myEventTrigger.Callback = MyFunctionCallback;
> 
>       CHIP_ERROR err = Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::Instance().RegisterTestEventTrigger(myEventTrigger);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a function that will be executed when the device receives a valid enable key and activation code.

   This function must return a ``CHIP_ERROR`` code and accept a ``Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::TriggerValue`` as its argument.
   You can utilize the provided argument within this function as needed.

   Use ``CHIP_ERROR`` codes to communicate appropriate responses to the Matter Controller.
   For instance, you might return ``CHIP_ERROR_INVALID_ARGUMENT`` to indicate that the user has provided an incorrect value argument.

   .. note::

      The callback method is not thread-safe.
      Ensure that all operations within it are executed in a thread-safe manner.
      To perform operations within the Matter stack context, use the ``chip::DeviceLayer::SystemLayer().ScheduleLambda`` method.
      For operations in the application context, use the ``Nrf::PostTask`` function.

   Here is an example of how to create a callback function:

   .. code-block:: c++

      CHIP_ERROR MyFunctionCallback(Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::TriggerValue value)
      {
          /* Define the required behavior of the device here. */

          return CHIP_NO_ERROR;
      }

#. Register the new event trigger.

   Use the following example as a guide to register a new event:

   .. code-block:: c++

      /* Create a new event */
      Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::EventTrigger myEventTrigger;

      /* Assign all fields */
      myEventTrigger.Id = /* Fill the ID filed */;
      myEventTrigger.Mask = /* Fill the value mask filed */;
      myEventTrigger.Callback = MyFunctionCallback;

      /* Register the new event */
      CHIP_ERROR err = Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::Instance().RegisterTestEventTrigger(myEventTrigger);

      /* Remember to check the CHIP_ERROR return code */

   Here's an example to handle the ``0xF000F00000001234`` activation code, where 1234 is the event trigger value field:

   .. code-block:: c++

      Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::EventTrigger myEventTrigger;
      myEventTrigger.Id = 0xF000F0000000;
      myEventTrigger.Mask = 0xFFFF;
      myEventTrigger.Callback = MyFunctionCallback;

      CHIP_ERROR err = Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::Instance().RegisterTestEventTrigger(myEventTrigger);
```
Indentation wasn't correct, so the numbered steps didn't build correctly.

.. _matter_test_event_triggers:

Matter test event triggers
##########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> Matter test event triggers are a set of software commands designed to initiate specific test scenarios.

Author: OK, Will move that information higher then :)

You can activate these commands using the Matter Controller, which serves as the interface for executing them.
To activate a command, you need to enter the pre-defined activation codes that correspond to the desired test event.
All test event triggers are based on the ``generaldiagnostics`` Matter cluster, and utilize the ``test-event-trigger`` command to function.
This mechanism can be used during the certification process to simulate common and specific device scenarios, and during software verification events to validate the correct operation of Matter-compliant devices.

> When you provide the enable key using factory data, you can utilize the event trigger feature during the Matter Certification process.
> This is because, when done this way, you can turn off the event trigger functionality by disabling access to the ``generaldiagnostics`` cluster without altering the code that has already been certified.
> 
> Once the certification process is complete, you can deactivate the test event trigger functionality by generating new factory data with a modified enable key value.
> This is done by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_ENABLE_KEY` Kconfig option to a value consisting solely of zeros.
> 
> For instance, to generate factory data with disabled event trigger functionality, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_ENABLE_KEY` Kconfig option to the value ``0x00000000000000000000000000000000``.
> After generating it, flash the :file:`factory_data.hex` file onto the device.

Reviewer: I think we could probably move this information to be a separate section. I'd say on the same level and just before the section for the custom event triggers section, or as the very last section. Something like "Using in Matter certification".

Having its own section gives it visibility, and it could then be linked from the mention on Line 14.
```suggestion
When you provide the enable key using factory data, you can utilize the event trigger feature during the Matter certification process.
This is because, when done this way, you can turn off the event trigger functionality by disabling access to the ``generaldiagnostics`` cluster without altering the code that has already been certified.

Once the certification process is complete, you can deactivate the test event trigger functionality by generating new factory data with a modified enable key value.
This is done by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_ENABLE_KEY` Kconfig option to a value consisting solely of zeros.

For instance, to generate factory data with disabled event trigger functionality, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_DEVICE_ENABLE_KEY` Kconfig option to the value ``0x00000000000000000000000000000000``.
After generating it, flash the :file:`factory_data.hex` file onto the device.
```

.. code-block:: c++

  /* Create the Trigger Handler object */
  static TestEventTriggerHandler existingTriggerHandler;
  CHIP_ERROR err = Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::Instance().RegisterTestEventTriggerHandler(&existingTriggerHandler);

  /* Remember to check the CHIP_ERROR return code */

If the returning ``CHIP_ERROR`` code is equal to ``CHIP_ERROR_NO_MEMORY``, you need to increase the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_TEST_EVENT_TRIGGERS_MAX_TRIGGERS_DELEGATES` kconfig option to the higher value.

For example, you can register and use the ``OTATestEventTriggerHandler`` handler and trigger pre-defined Matter OTA DFU behaviors using the following code:

.. code-block:: c++

  /* Create the Trigger Handler object */
  static chip::OTATestEventTriggerHandler otaTestEventTrigger;
  ReturnErrorOnFailure(Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::Instance().RegisterTestEventTriggerHandler(&otaTestEventTrigger));

Usage
*****

To trigger a specific event on the device, run the following command:

.. code-block:: console

  ./chip-tool generaldiagnostics test-event-trigger hex:<enable key> <activation code> <node id> 0

> Replace the ``enable key``, ``activation code``, and ``node id`` values with the values for the event you want to trigger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace the ``enable key`` value with your device's enable key, and the ``activation code`` and ``node id`` values with the values for the event you want to trigger.
```
Just realized that this sentence could be bit more specific.

     /* Remember to check the CHIP_ERROR return code */

   If the returning `CHIP_ERROR` code is equal to `CHIP_ERROR_NO_MEMORY`, you need to increase the :kconfig:option:`NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_TEST_EVENT_TRIGGERS_MAX` kconfig option to the higher value.

   Here's an example to handle the ``0xF000F00000001234`` activation code, where 1234 is the event trigger value field:

   .. code-block:: c++

     Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::EventTrigger myEventTrigger;
     uint64_t myTriggerID = 0xF000F0000000;
     myEventTrigger.Mask = 0xFFFF;
     myEventTrigger.Callback = MyFunctionCallback;

     CHIP_ERROR err = Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::Instance().RegisterTestEventTrigger(myTriggerID, myEventTrigger);

Register an existing test event trigger handler
***********************************************

In Matter SDK there are some already implemented test event trigger handlers.
All of them inherits by `TestEventTriggerHandler` class and are implemented in various places in the Matter SDK.
You can use them and their pre-defined behaviors using the test event triggers mechanism presented on this page.

> The events declared in an existing test event triggers can have the a different semantic than described in the :ref:`matter_test_event_triggers_custom_triggers` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The events declared in existing test event triggers can have a different semantic than described in the :ref:`matter_test_event_triggers_custom_triggers` section.
```

Use the following example as a guide to register an existing event trigger handler:

.. code-block:: c++

  /* Create the Trigger Handler object */
  static TestEventTriggerHandler existingTriggerHandler;
  CHIP_ERROR err = Nrf::Matter::TestEventTrigger::Instance().RegisterTestEventTriggerHandler(&existingTriggerHandler);

  /* Remember to check the CHIP_ERROR return code */

> If the returning `CHIP_ERROR` code is equal to `CHIP_ERROR_NO_MEMORY`, you need to increase the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_TEST_EVENT_TRIGGERS_MAX_TRIGGERS_DELEGATES` kconfig option to the higher value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the returning ``CHIP_ERROR`` code is equal to ```CHIP_ERROR_NO_MEMORY``, you need to increase the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_TEST_EVENT_TRIGGERS_MAX_TRIGGERS_DELEGATES` kconfig option to the higher value.
```

> For example, you can register and use the `OTATestEventTriggerHandler` and trigger pre-defined Matter OTA DFU behaviors using the following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can register and use the ``OTATestEventTriggerHandler`` handler and trigger pre-defined Matter OTA DFU behaviors using the following code:
```
